# CONSERVATION OF MASS

## Isothermal Liquid Flows

In isothermal liquid flows, the fluid density is typically a known
constant. What are the dependent field variables in this case? How many
equations are needed for a successful mathematical description of such
flows? What physical principles supply these equations?

Solution

When the fluid's temperature is constant and its density is a known
constant, the thermal energy of fluid elements cannot be changed by heat
transfer or work because $dT = dv = 0$, so the thermodynamic
characterization of the flow is complete from knowledge of the density.
Thus, the dependent field variables are $\mathbf{u}$, the fluid's
velocity (momentum per unit mass), and the pressure, $p$. Here, $p$ is
not a thermodynamic variable; instead it is a normal force (per unit
area) developed between neighboring fluid particles that either causes
or results from fluid-particle acceleration, or arises from body forces.
Thus, four equations are needed; one for each component of $\mathbf{u}$,
and one for $p$. These equations are supplied by the principle of mass
conservation, and three components of Newton's second law for fluid
motion (conservation of momentum).

## CONSERVATION OF MASS

Setting aside nuclear reactions and relativistic effects, mass is
neither created nor destroyed. Thus, individual mass elements ---
molecules, grains, fluid particles, etc. --- may be tracked within a
flow field because they will not disappear and new elements will not
spontaneously appear. The equations representing conservation of mass in
a flowing fluid are based on the principle that the mass of a specific
collection of neighboring fluid particles is constant. The volume
occupied by a specific collection of fluid particles is called a
material volume $V(t)$. Such a volume moves and deforms within a fluid
flow so that it always contains the same mass elements; none enter the
volume and none leave it. This implies that a material volume's surface
$A(t)$, a material surface, must move at the local fluid velocity
$\mathbf{u}$ so that fluid particles inside $V(t)$ remain inside and
fluid particles outside $V(t)$ remain outside. Thus, a statement of
conservation of mass for a material volume in a flowing fluid is:

$$\frac{d}{dt}\int_{V(t)} \rho(\mathbf{x}, t) d V=0.$$

where $\rho$ is the fluid density.
